Title: The Organic Web: Self-Replicating Web Pages

Author: Lafe Spietz

Impact Statement:

The World Wide Web has totally revolutionized how human communication works. Decentralizing the web can have implications for how all social networks in society are structured. This paper presents a new way of storing and sharing information on the web, where every user on the network can copy, edit, or delete any file on the system. 

Introduction: Viral versus Organic Media

Viral media have become a part of our everyday lives, for better or worse. Both good ideas and bad ideas spread much like biological viruses. Viruses, both biological and digital, consist of information that can infect a host, causing that host to replicate the information. Whether to call biological viruses organisms is controversial—in one sense, they are simply code that hacks an existing life form and uses it to make copies. In the case of a digital contagion like a conspiracy theory on Facebook, an infected host—a person—posts a meme on their Facebook wall; other people see it, believe it, and decide to the post it to their walls, which Facebook displays in other users' feeds; and thus the information propagates both in the minds of the users and in the databases Facebook uses to keep track of such things. 

What if memes are like viral information that infects a host, and the host is social media? What is the nature of that host, and how does it reproduce?  Just like a human or a tree, social media platforms have a reproductive life cycle. They produce vast amounts of money, much of which finds its way back into venture investments, which go into new startup companies. These companies spend money on network infrastructure and labor to build new software and attempt to grow themselves into organisms so large that they too can become static hosts of viral information (the equilibrium state of social media platforms seems to be the creation of monopolies, which halts reproduction). 

What is presented here is another type of self-replicating information: social media that can replicate from one web host to another, without a company, without employees, without a centralized code base. Code can be modified in situ on each web server that hosts the code by any user on the network; then, when another server is seeded from that code, it replicates that new instance. In this “trust everyone” model, we assume that the ability of users to replicate good code and delete bad code, allowing networks to evolve more organically than is possible with centralized platforms. More local trust models can be established with servers on a local wireless network, where only other users on that network can edit the files, but that node can still replicate from any other node on the global network.

Because each instance of the code behaves like an independent organism, I call this system of information storage the “organic web.” What follows is a discussion of how the code is structured; the mechanics of how it is replicated, edited, and deleted (or to use the language of biological reproduction, evolves and dies); and how information can flow through the system. I then give instructions for how the reader can replicate the system both on servers I have put up on the open web and on their own free or close-to-free web servers. I conclude with a discussion of how the organic web could be scaled up.



Scaling and Implications


As with any network, the way this network scales is a function of how interconnected it is and how information flows through the network. Because all code can replicate over all other code on the network, the rate at which the whole code base can change is radically accelerated over that of centralized systems like commercial social media platforms. A new app in existing software systems usually propagates by way of some new commercial venture getting funded by investors, hiring employees, creating intellectual property, and scaling up server usage. However, the theory of the organic web is that a new app can replicate to the entire network in minutes, even with modest bandwidth usage. If we imagine that a page is on the order of 1 MB, with a 1 MB/sec connection, it can copy to 10 other pages in a few seconds. Propagation to 10 billion pages can be done by repeating this 10-sec process 10 times, so in minutes a new app could propagate across an entire network at global scale. If many people are simultaneously developing code, copying it, editing it, and deleting bad branches, it is possible to achieve evolution of the whole system in seconds, which is exponentially faster than any existing code development system.

It is worth noting here that just as the scaling up of printing press networks required a rapid expansion of literacy in the population at large, this will require a rapid expansion of basic literacy in the core programming languages of the client-side web (HTML, CSS, and JavaScript) as well as some basic understanding of what a web server is and how it works. Deploying this network to nontechnical people would therefore largely be structured as a STEM education and outreach project at first.

Decentralized, resilient networks built on this model can be used to create social networks based on the creation of free content of value to the community at large in societies targeted by terrorist organizations. Violent organizations thrive in closed, encrypted networks based on software like Telegram as well as centralized networks like YouTube and Twitter. YouTube's power comes from its monopoly (central control). Telegram’s power comes from its ability to hide (evade central control). A totally open network based on trust gets its resiliency from the constant upkeep as people delete bad information and replicate good information. The strength of this new computer network comes from the strength of the mutual trust in the human network it supports. On an open network, the pages that increase mutual trust and openness will tend to replicate themselves, and those that don’t will tend to get deleted. It remains to be seen how this will work in practice, but it can be hoped that the elements of the network that are of greater benefit will be able to evolve faster than the more nefarious elements because of the large number of people collaborating on the code. 

The money and hardware needed to scale this network are minimal, as it can be propagated on free web-hosting platforms as well as Raspberry Pi hardware, which very low cost (under $100) and are able to host many pages. Code can be edited by anyone from any terminal, including public library terminals, meaning active developers don’t even need to own any hardware. It is hoped that in the developing world it will be possible to scale this with almost no infrastructure at all, creating social network alternatives to existing destructive centralized or encrypted networks. The creation of these alternatives could have significant societal implications. Readers interested in supporting such a project should contact the author.
